---
layout: post
title: WIR-022
date: 2026-04-05
description: A hard reset.
tags: WIR
categories:
tikzjax: true
---

### Work completed
---

|   Date   | DOTW      | Work Completed                                   |
| :------: | --------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| 03-30-26 | Monday    | [PhD] Trip to Boston!                            |
| 03-31-26 | Tuesday   | [PhD] Trip to Boston!                            |
| 04-01-26 | Wednesday | [RSR] PIML-QPE – Writing manuscript              |
| 04-02-26 | Thursday  | [RSR] PIML-QPE – Writing manuscript              |
| 04-03-26 | Friday    | [RSR] PIML-QPE – Writing manuscript/meeting prep |
| 04-04-26 | Saturday  | Sick 🤒 (also some research lol)                 |
| 04-05-26 | Sunday    | [RSR] PIML-QPE – Writing manuscript/meeting prep |
{: .table .table-bordered .table-striped}

### Reflections
---

This week, you may notice that we've left out the recurring commitments portion of WIR, as well as the action items from the preceding week. Truth be told, now is the time to enact a hard reset of these posts. At the beginning of the year, we established a number of ambitious goals involving new and beneficial habits. As the weeks progressed, sticking to ALL of these brand new routines proved challenging–and even as we made forward progress, the knowledge that several goals were left unachieved made the week-in-review a somewhat deflationary practice. To that end, we are making the following adjustment. Each WIR going forward will focus on the addition and/or improvement of just **one** habit/behavior. The "recurring commitments" tab will stay, but starting next week, all *unformed* habits will be stripped away.

Basically, rather than try to magically transform across all domains of life simultaneously, we will stick to the principled approach of making *one* meaningful change per week. Edits to the personal constitution will be made to reflect these changes–with a renewed focus on research/work priorities. The week-in-review is an ongoing experiment to make positive adjustments in the context of a messy human life. This is a painful and iterative process, as nobody is perfect and honest self-reflection is difficult. Nonetheless, we can start to build some serious momentum during the coming months by narrowing our focus toward professional pursuits, and by making sure we celebrate our wins along the way.

### Action items
---

**Weekly goal**
- [ ] 1. Write 400+ *new* words (or edit an equivalent amount) at the start of each day for 5+ days.

Until next week 👋