---
layout: post
title: WIR-023
date: 2026-04-19
description: Chaos, next steps, and the beautiful unknown.
tags: WIR
categories:
tikzjax: true
---

### Previous goals
---

- [x] 1. Write 400+ *new* words (or edit an equivalent amount) at the start of each day for 5+ days.

### Work completed
---

- I worked very hard on a manuscript! Hoping to share this with you folks as soon as possible.

### Reflections
---

At the outset of this pseudo-blog, I assumed that *ambitious goals* would make for the best motivation. It turns out that even modest, exceptionally simple but very well-chosen goals work much, much better. Over the past two weeks I've done more writing than the previous three months put together. Indeed, as an aspiring academic (that is, a quant who doesn't know they're a quant yet), my only job *really* is to write and bring in that sweet, sweet grant money to my chosen university.

Those thoughts aside, it's time for some news! I've committed to a Ph.D. in Interdisciplinary Engineering at Northeastern University under the primary advisement of Auroop Ganguly. (The ambiguity of my degree-title brings me a lot of joy, and I hope it will provide an escape from needless stuffiness). What I will work on next remains completely unknown to me. After over a year of narrowing my interests to the domain of radar meteorology, my best guess is that I will focus on the impacts of measurement uncertainty. Questions this topic may adress include: *"What are the societal consequences of errors in trusted observations?"* My interest in this line of research developed after working on the 70-year-old problem of precipitation estimation, and realizing that even gold-standard datasets of real-world observations are rife with uncertainties. These may include theoretical gaps, measurement errors, *theoretical errors*, incomplete observations, and that fact that sometimes we correctly measure the *wrong thing*. Uncertainties even prevade our lists of known unceratinities.

As a computer scientist, I learned to develop methods that improve on weak baselines. Now, I've begun to take a different perspective. Thinking–*What are the consequences of placing complete trust in an ambigious ground truth* This romantic notion of going around breaking things, then writing pretty papers seems to me like a lovely use of time. And if (because I can not know what the future holds) my academic life fails to pan out–Boston isn't a bad place to flame out.

### Action items
---

**Weekly goal**
- [ ] 1. Write 400+ *new* words (or edit an equivalent amount) at the start of each day for 7 days.
- [ ] 2. As an alternative to (1) two uninterupted hours spent working on figures will count as 200 words.

Until next week 👋