# Evaluation of Sub-Hourly MRMS Quantitative Precipitation Estimates in Mountainous Terrain Using Machine Learning

### Background

- The state of Colorado is home to complex geography and terrain and recieves precipitation varying greatly over space and time. The multi-radar multi-sensor (MRMS) dataset developed by the National Severe Storm Laboratory (NSSL) provides radar-based quantitative precipitation estimates (QPE) on a 1x1 km gridded mosaic updating every two minutes. In Colorado there are ~200 publicly available rain gauges that capture precipitation with ultra-fine temporal resolution at varying altitudes.
- The primary purpose of this study is to first, evaluate differences between MRMS radar-only QPE and rain gauges (esp. at high altitudes), and next, to extrapolate those findings to create uncertainty estimates for MRMS QPE across areas of the state without surface precipitation measurements.

### Problem Statement

- To develop a data-driven analysis of MRMS QPE reliability in the state of Colorado using rain gauges as a pseudo-ground truth. Next, to extrapolate uncetainty estimates across the entire state; use a gridded dataset to probe the key factors driving uncertainty/QPE errors.

### Method

- The author begin by developing a historical dataset of MRMS radar-only QPE at sub-hourly resolution (i.e., 15 min. intervals) from 2018-2023 containing 200+ rain gauges from CSU, USGS, CoAGMET, and MesoWest. Analysis is limited to the warm months (i.e., March-September) to filter potentially troublesome freezing precipitation. In total, this corpus contains ~37k 8-hour time-series values marking the root-mean sqaured error (RSME) using rain gauges spatially and temporally interpolated up to the MRMS grid-scale as ground truth. Care is taken to filter out data points for which either the MRMS or rain-gauge QPE are zero. In the paper, 28 features are hand-selected to train a machine learning model, including features which are point-dependent (e.g., 15 minute rainfall intensity) and storm-dependent (e.g., total area). Additionally, the authors evaluate topgraphic features such as elevation and slope.

- Next, a gradient-boosted regessor trained with quantile loss (QL) is introduced. Three models are trained to predict the 90% confident interval (CI) (i.e., 5%, 50%/median, 95% percentiles) to predict the RMSE in the "statewide" dataset introduced above. The authors develop a linear regression model trained on the same task to act as a baseline. Prior to training, 20% of our original dataset is set aside to be a test set. The remaining 80% of data comprise our training and validation sets. Validation is conducted using 5-fold (i.e., 4/1 train/val) straification.

### Evaluation

- The authors perform extensive analysis for the distribution of RMSE over space and time in the state of Colorado, model performance (both kernal densities of target/predicted distributions are visualized), and the MRMS radar quality index (RQI) before and after the introduction of MRMS V12.0 in 2021. All analysis are performed on ~500k 8-hour timeseries samples generated by the trained, 50%-quantile model. This analysis datatset is refered to as the "statewide dataset" throught As a reminder, a key purpose of this study is uncover the salient features driving uncertainty w.r.t. MRMS QPE in the state of Colorado. To that end, permutation tests are conducted on all three model variants – yeilding fairly similar results but differing in magnitude. Disagreement betweeen the results of feature permuation in training/test sets are is interpreted as a sign of overfitting in this work.
- The authors also conduct many experiements twice, once with RMSE as the target feature, and again with normalized-RMSE (nRMSE) to control for the effects of rainfall magnitude on overall uncertainty. Results show 15-minute rainfall intensity to be the most important predictive feature across all model varaints. This finding is intuitive. What is more surprising is that storm-related features are all assigned low importance scores. The authors choices regarding "what constitutes a storm" likely played a key role here. A dataset containing either/or MRMS/rain-gauge "zero values" is also produced to evaluate the occurance of false negative and false positve precipitation estimates.

### Conclusions & Future Work

- A study of MRMS QPE reliability in the state of Colorado is presented, along with a machine learning method to model QPE uncertainty for areas where rain gauge coverage is fairly sparse. Key findings of this work include that QPE uncertainty at the sub-hourly scale is generally high (42% median RMSE, 40% std), with MRMS tending to *overestimate* surface-precipitation, but that RQI appears to be a weaker predictor of MRMS-reliability than previously thought. However, a consistent correlation is observed between distance/elevation from a radar site and RMSE. Also, MRMS-QPE "skillfulness" generally improves as time goes on. This result is consistent with some of the observations we made with the CCRFCD gauge-network during my time at NWS Las Vegas.
- The models developed in this paper are fairly well calibrated w.r.t. CIs, and therfore provide fairly useful estimates of histroical MRMS uncertainty.
- Future work might extend on this study by developing methods to **improve** QPE, rather than simply model uncertainty. The authors highlight several AI-driven works that embrace methods such as CNNs to capture complex, disporate space-time dependencies.
