---
layout: post
title: WIR-025
date: 2026-04-26
description: Disasters are waiting to happen.
tags: WIR
categories:
tikzjax: true
---

### Previous goals
---

- [x] 1. Write 400+ *new* words (or edit an equivalent amount) at the start of each day for 7 days.
- [x] 2. As an alternative to (1) two uninterrupted hours spent working on figures will count as 200 words.

### Work completed
---

- Work on my manuscript continues. A draft (or a very poor draft) will be ready by the end of next week.

### Reflections
---

All around us, disasters are waiting to happen. In our bodies, our homes, driving along the freeway-the many complex systems we come in contact with create *risk* in our lives. Here, I will define risk using an intuitive and unscientific formula, where

$$
\text{risk} = \text{probability of event} \times \text{disruption}.
$$

Utilizing this framework, we may easily classify *small risks*, such as running into your ex at a supermarket, and *large risks*, like flying a plane with your eyes closed. In this short post, I'll argue that gambles like these, big and small, are a natural part of life. In fact, they are essential to the survival of our species, which may explain the otherwise inexplicable tolerance we humans have for danger. Another thorny question we will address is whether or not risk can be categorized as good or bad—where **good risks** are the survivable kind: minor inconveniences that ultimately make us more robust, and **bad risks** the sort you only get to take once. And if this distinction can be made, do humans allow for bad things to happen to individuals, businesses, communities, and even cities for the benefit of a collective? Our quest for answers begins nearly 100 years ago at the mouth of the Mississippi delta.

##### The Great Flood of 1927

The year is 1927. Life is as good-ish as it gets in the Crescent City: New Orleans, otherwise known as the Big Easy. The city's nickname came from its musicians, who found the prospects of getting work *easier* than in other parts of America. The late 20s were the height of the Jazz Age, a time when industrial cabals ran the show in southern Louisiana. Powerful business elite, bank owners, and bootleggers held the seats of power during this period. But following the close of the Civil War, it was the U.S. Army who was put in charge of taming the mighty banks of the Mississippi. Against all existing scientific wisdom, an executive decision had been made to undertake this project using a "levees-only" approach. Levees, for those just now learning what they are, are earthwork dams, much wider than they are tall, designed to hold back a flowing body of water. It is a simple fact of physics that when you constrain the natural course of a river, total water volume tends to increase. Pressure builds up, and the banks of the river will rise higher unless that pressure is released. Hence the key problem with the levees-only approach. On the eve of the great floods of 1927, the banks of the Mississippi River rose as high as 30 feet in some places, held back by nothing but enormous mountains of sandbags. Months of continuous rain would propel the river as high as 40 feet in places, and inevitably, levees would fail one by one upstream, moving south. Great floods move slowly, sometimes taking months and stretching over thousands of miles before they complete.

The ruling class of New Orleans made the remarkable decision to dynamite the levees downstream as a prophylactic measure, sacrificing their neighbors to the east to save their own homes and businesses. To my knowledge, no punishments were doled out to those who made this decision, and in the end, it proved unnecessary. Levees further up the Mississippi broke before the floodwaters made their way down the crescent of the river. But the damage had been done. Thousands of square miles were flooded, and hundreds of thousands of people were displaced for months. Unpacking a disaster like this can raise more questions than it answers. What were the causes, indeed, of the 1927 flood? Certainly, they were atmospheric, as it rained for several continuous months. They were also the result of engineering error. The U.S. Army Corps, against their own scientific advising, insisted on employing a levees-only approach, when utilization of spillways and other flood control techniques could have ameliorated disaster. Political mistakes must also be weighed into this calculation. First and foremost, New Orleans is a port city, built mostly below sea level, and one that was well known to be flood-prone since its inception. The unsatisfying truth is that calamities are almost never the result of a singular failure point. Instead, they are the aggregate consequence of compounding mistakes made by many individuals and organizations. Human beings, nonetheless, tolerate risks like building in a floodplain because they are literally the cost of doing business. In order to survive and profit, it is necessary for many folks to bear exposure to chronic danger. Additionally, the memory of disaster fades through generations, propelling us to make mistakes, sometimes in the same places, and sometimes of the exact same nature.

##### Hurricane Katrina

It's August, 2005. A Category 5 hurricane sits a few hundred miles off the coast of southern Louisiana. Then-Mayor of New Orleans, Ray Nagin, is on TV in a suit, ordering an immediate and complete evacuation of the city of New Orleans. In the weeks to follow, the United States of America will suffer its greatest economic loss as a result of natural disaster in its 250 year history. But the most surprising element of this story is that the storm waiting off the coast, Hurricane Katrina, would both weaken considerably before making landfall and shift its course well east of New Orleans. For these reasons, the immediate impacts of Hurricane Katrina were fairly minor compared to the excruciatingly slow calamity that would unravel during the coming days, weeks, and months. As the storm came onshore, billions of gallons of water moved in with the storm surge into areas such as Lake Pontchartrain and near the Ninth Ward. During the ensuing days, water would lap over New Orleans' system of levees, eroding the earthworks at their base on the opposite side. Eventually, the metal spikes driven dozens of feet underground gave way, and the wall of water at the base of the levees pushed through as if it were knocking down a row of dominoes. Over 80% of the Crescent City would flood during this period. Toxic water covered two-story homes, and nearly 1,500 lives would be lost months later when a final tally could be made. As is more commonly heard during such events, who is to blame? Was the Army Corps of Engineers responsible for building New Orleans flood control only to a Category 3 hurricane standard? Was the Bush administration and their delayed response the core contributor to the prolonged nature of the disaster? Or could the residents of New Orleans themselves be blamed for living in a flood-prone area, or for voluntarily refusing to evacuate after receiving warning from public officials? The truth is more complex. 

When things go really, *really* wrong, it is likely that multiple points of failure could be observed in retrospect. With the benefit of hindsight, I will argue that there are two stories that explain the aftermath of Katrina. The first is not exciting. Most of New Orleans is under water. New Orleans is a city that sits along the coast. New Orleans has flooded many times in the past, either from fluvial inundation or from storm surge. Therefore, the city lies in a risk-prone area. There is no height to which one could build a network of levees or a standard to which they could fit a system of drainage pumps that would completely eliminate this chronic risk. Chronic exposure to flood hazards is one of the implicit costs of being a citizen of the Big Easy. It is my belief that on some level, residents, government officials–at both the state and federal level–and the general public *knew*, to some degree, that New Orleans was certain to flood in the future. This is the first side of the story of Katrina. The other has everything to do with the government response after inevitable disaster struck. FEMA, the Bush administration, and other culpable agencies failed to act in a timely manner after landfall. A quick response may have saved hundreds, if not over a thousand more lives than were lost, and would have alleviated much pain and suffering unnecessarily endured by the inundated and displaced residents of southern Louisiana. What disgusts me more is to wade through the garbage espoused by popular media outlets of the time. Trusted sources on both the left and right sides of the aisle happily amplified baseless rumors, contributing misinformation and exacerbating racial tensions throughout the region. What concerns me more is to think that this disaster struck just twenty years ago. And for this reason, I feel confident that should a similar calamity occur today, our government's response will be once again conditioned on the demographic of the population affected. Moreover, it seems to me that a multi-billion dollar renovated flood control system isn't worth very much if the culture and community of the city you're trying to protect have already been irrevocably damaged. These are the two sides of risk. On the one hand, there is the latent probability of bad things occurring, which is to some extent an inexorable part of life, and on the other hand, there is what we do when things go wrong that more often determines the scope of calamity.

##### Conclusion

I will close with a non-obvious statement–*humans aren't dumb*. They take risks and they know it. Sometimes these risks balloon into tragedy, but ultimately, as a species, we survive and even benefit as a result of having learned from our past failures. Learning through failure, in fact, is sometimes the only way to make progress when dealing with otherwise inscrutable complex systems. The ideas presented here are not entirely my own. Nassim Nicholas Taleb in *Antifragile* does an excellent job of expounding on these themes in the context of capitalism. By intentionally allowing young entrepreneurs to fail and fail and fail, the U.S. government reaps the rewards of their misfortunes by providing counterexamples to the general public for free, lessons on what not to do. Why do we build homes in floodplains? Why do we continue to live in cities that are underwater? We don't do so because we're ignorant of the risks. Only a naive scientist would take this point of view. Instead, we do so, I will argue, because there are subtle residual benefits. Our species grows stronger when our constituents fail. And so we let people, buildings, and ideas collapse when otherwise they could have been preserved to prevent the decay of inactivity. The subconscious will of humanity is more intelligent than it might appear. And to subject it to rational thought may be a textbook example of overthinking. The complicated and dissatisfying reality is that not all risks are dangers, and not all threats are existential. Finding a way to draw a line in the sand between the good and the bad risks we take remains an open problem. I hope to find resolution on this delineation myself before delving into future research.

I'll add one final thought. It is an ugly truth that knowing the future is insufficient knowledge to stop bad things happening when flaws exist in the institutions that are responsible for ameliorating impacts. A thread runs through the Great Flood of 1927, passage of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and even the Texas Hill Country floods of 2025. These disasters did not occur because of any epistemic limits of our species. They were, as most disasters are, completely preventable. It is clear that we must find ways to build systems that surpass or compensate for the flaws latent in human judgments. These systems must also be constructed delicately so as to preserve the autonomy of individuals and their basic liberties. Attempting to balance these tensions seems to me completely intractable. Luckily, all I'm trying to be is a scientist.

### Action items
---

**Weekly goal**
- [ ] 1. Write 400+ *new* words (or edit an equivalent amount) at the start of each day for 7 days.
- [ ] 2. As an alternative to (1) two uninterrupted hours spent working on figures will count as 200 words.

Until next week 👋